we want to be people of reason or we
should want to be people of reason
both those things are actually the same
indeed we want our societies to be
governed
by reason but people being people
have different preferences how then
should we go about deciding
what we as a society should do given
differing viewpoints
well we vote don't we we enact the will
of the people
and to ensure we are reasonable when we
go about doing this
we should employ the tools of reason
mathematics to the rescue of course
indeed there is a branch of mathematics
called game
theory and within that an even narrower
branch
called social choice theory which as we
will come to see
animated such luminaries as von neumann
to try to set in mathematical stone
the logical rules for making decisions
when people's
preferences differed the point of this
chapter
chapter 13 choices as i said anyway is
twofold
on the one hand it is a defense of logic
and mathematics and reason more
generally to solve
problems to solve real problems but on
the other
it is a criticism of the idea that we
can create pristine algorithms
proofs or whatever you like of what we
should do
how we should vote what voting systems
we should implement what decision
algorithms we should we should try and
legislate for
so that we are always perfectly
reasonable
the reason why that project has failed
and will always fail
is because there exists in the
mathematical universe and hence in the
physical universe
so-called no-go theorems these no-go
theorems can be used to show
or mathematically prove we might say
that there is no such thing really as
the will of the people
now as david writes on and will come to
this on page 338
there is no way to regard society as a
decision-maker with self-consistent
preferences end quote society is a thing
that exists
but it is not something analogous to a
single mind which can indeed be
said to have preferences but as we also
come to see
things are even more complicated than
that it gets even worse because
individual minds themselves must be
inconsistent in some ways
so the whole purpose here and why
this chapter is has such an important
role in the beginning of infinity
is that we want to make choices that
transform the world into a better place
don't we
but any attempt to do this by supposedly
perfectly rational means
will always meet with paradoxes and
irrationality
and this is because the conventional
view of transforming the world into a
better place is to decide between
the existing theories on offer but in
truth this is rarely actually the choice
before us whether it's in our own
personal lives
or as a society at large we people
create new explanations which themselves
transform the world and this
misconception about what decision making
is
is what sam harris might call on his
podcast one of the most pressing
problems of our time end quote
people get into terrible debates and
deadlock and dead ends in those debates
over what should and indeed must
absolutely be done
to solve some particular problem but
they fight over
the existing solutions as though they
are the only possible solutions
that shall ever present themselves or
that indeed this is how we should spend
a great deal
of our energy in debates over dead end
solutions
rational decision making as we'll come
to see
on this worldview and we're going to
explore this
towards the more towards the end of the
chapter
is more about choosing among
explanations
and finding which is the best
explanation once all the others have
been successfully criticized
and remember and david makes this point
here in this chapter and he's made it
in many other places as well having
multiple explanations for any phenomena
is exceedingly rare one is lucky enough
to be presented with one single
explanation
and in very rare cases we've got two so
rather often we have this one
explanation and so it's called
the explanation of whatever that thing
happens to be and so that's the one that
we use to direct rational human action
and where we lack a good explanation
which is extremely often then we have to
create
new explanations we have to create more
knowledge and this then helps us to
increase the repertoire of choices that
we have before us
and this idea of having one good
namely one hard to vary known
best explanation for a given phenomena
applies to
deciding among explanations itself it's
reflexive there is only
one known good explanation of how to
decide among
good explanations and that's what we're
going to be discussing here in the
chapter
on choices it extends into voting
systems which is an absolutely crucial
part of a functioning society
there really are worse voting systems
and where they exist
they tend towards irrational outcomes
more than the alternative
best system would so this chapter begins
with an extended and pretty detailed
investigation into and it's it's
seemingly
quirky but as it's being used as an
example
of the irrationality that can creep into
apparently perfectly rational systems
but but it begins with the example of
the united states house of
representatives of all things
and it it talks about how these seats
are allocated there in the united states
house of representatives now
although very interesting in itself it
seems rather parochial which is unusual
for the beginning of infinity but really
the this discussion about the united
states house of representatives is just
serving as a case study
about how to rationally make decisions
in this case how can it be rationally
decided
to allocate the correct number of seats
per state to the house of reps
now at times in this chapter i'm going
to skim because there is a lot of detail
here
so i'll skim part of the chapter which
isn't typically my practice
normally i'll read a chunk and then tell
you when i'm leaving out a bit but but i
might not do this type
that this time just to make things flow
a little better so i might be leaving
out lots but i won't be telling you that
i'm leaving out lots
so i'd urge you if you need more
indeed you must go to chapter 13
choices because i'll be leaving out some
and at times i won't be making you aware
of it
and the reason the reason the chapter is
so detailed is because david really does
do a comprehensive overview
of just about all the objections that
the reader might reasonably raise
as he presents each problem with the
voting system
and this is because in in a rather
astonishing way each
simple logical or mathematical solution
to
the problem being raised itself creates
new problems so each time then this is
of course common in science and
mathematics in general but here it is uh
especially illuminating but you think oh
why don't they just and david will talk
about this why don't they just id
that there might be a very simple
solution clear
or obvious to most people thinking about
the topic but when pursued through to
its logical conclusion
itself causes logical problems and so
just for um
for illustrative purposes i'll only i'll
only talk about a couple of these
problems myself and so you need to go to
the book
uh because the the upshot of it all is
even when the full force of mathematics
and the best mathematicians indeed
are applied to seemingly trivial
problems like how do we fairly allocate
the number of seats in the house of reps
among the states insoluble problems and
paradoxes arise and that should be a
concern to anyone who thinks they can
like dr spock or some other vulcan from
star trek be perfectly logical
all or almost all of the time so what's
the parable of all this going to be well
creativity is needed so this chapter is
very much a beginning
of infinity and although david does not
really mention the term in this chapter
he doesn't he doesn't highlight it that
much it's always there beneath the
surface
that it's very much about morality it's
an investigation
into the logic of morality now after all
morality is very much the question of
what to do next how to choose among the
options presented to you about what to
do next
or how to possibly in more
more often the cases given that the
choices before you
are unsatisfactory one must deploy their
creativity
in order to create a new and better
choice than the one that
and the ones that exist and this idea
that morality is
is is about what to do next more on that
in david's second interview with sam
harris on the making sense podcast
morality is about choices deciding what
to do
so let's begin the chapter and let's
look at the logic of decision making and
how we can make better choices both
personally and as a society
so hello welcome to topcast after that
lengthy introduction chapter 13 choices
i'm diving straight in in march 1792
george washington exercised the first
presidential veto
in the history of the united states of
america unless you already know what he
and congress were quarreling about
i doubt you will be able to guess yet
the issue remains controversial to this
day
with hindsight one may even perceive a
certain inevitability in it
for as i shall explain it is rooted in a
far-reaching misconception
about the nature of human choice which
is still prevalent
paul said my reflection what an
introduction to the chapter
i mean far-reaching misconception about
the
the nature of human choice so this is
why
we're looking at this rather parochial
quirky little example
and as i said in my introduction i'm
just going to skim read
through parts of this back to the book
on the face of it
the issue seems no more than a
technicality in the u.s house of
representatives
how many seats should each state be
allotted this is known as the
apportionment
problem because the u.s constitution
requires
seats to be apportioned among the
several states
according to their respective numbers
i.e their respective populations
so if your state contained one percent
of the u.s population it would be
entitled to one percent of the seats in
the house
this was intended to implement the
principle of representative government
that the legislature should represent
the people
it was after all about the house of
representatives the u.s senate and
contrast
represents the states of the union and
hence each state regardless of
population has
two senators just as a parochial side
very similar to the australian senate
except we have far fewer
states and so we have more senators per
state we've got
12 12 senators from each state here in
australia
if anyone's interested in that quirky
piece of trivia back to the book
at present there are 435 seats in the
house of representatives so
if one percent of the us population did
live in your state
then by strict proportionality the
number of representatives to which it
would be entitled
known as its quota would be 4.35
when the quotas are not whole numbers
which of course they hardly ever
are they have to be rounded somehow the
method of rounding
is known as the apportionment rule the
constitution did not specify an
apportionment rule
it left such details to congress and
that is where the centuries of
controversy began
pause there my reflection so uh the
the bulk of this first half of the
chapter i suppose
is all about this so you've got this
idea that the senate
that the house of representatives has to
be representative of the people
and so if the state has one percent of
the population then it should be
entitled to one percent of the seats in
the house of representatives
but because the number of seats in the
house of representatives is clearly
always going to be
far far smaller than number of people in
the entire united states
there's going to be this rounding
problem and so you might very well round
down or you might very well round up
whether you choose to round in one
particular way or
another is going to be called the
apportionment rule
okay and so this is going to be the
source
of lots and lots of really interesting
paradoxes and problems i'm going to come
to the point that there can be no such
perfectly rational
fair apportionment rule
but that's kind of stealing the thunder
from later on but let's go back to the
book
an apportionment rule is said to stay
within the quota if the number of seats
that it allocates to each state
never differs from the state's quota by
as much as the whole seat
for instance if a state's quota is 4.35
seats then to
stay within the quota a rule must assign
that state either four seats
or five it may take all sorts of
information into account in choosing
between four and five
but if it is capable of assigning any
other number it is said to
violate quota right that seems perfectly
fair and reasonable
let's keep going when one first hears of
the apportionment problem compromises
that seem to solve it at a stroke spring
easily to mind
everyone asks why couldn't they just
here is what i asked why couldn't they
just round each state's quota to the
nearest whole number
under that rule a quota of 4.35 seats
would be rounded down to 4
4.6 seats would be rounded up to 5. it
seemed to me that
since this sort of rounding can never
add or subtract more than half a seat
it would keep each state within half a
seat of its quota thus staying within
the quota with room to spare
i was wrong my rule violates quota this
is easy to demonstrate by applying it to
an imaginary house of representatives
with 10 seats in a nation of four states
suppose that one of the states has just
under 85 percent of the total population
and that the other three of just over
five percent each the large state
therefore has a quota of just under
8.5 which my rule rounds down to eight
each of the three small states has a
quota of just over half a seat
which my rule rounds up to one but now
we have allocated
11 seats not 10. in itself that hardly
matters the nation merely has one more
legislator to feed than planned
the real problem is that this
apportionment is no longer
representative
85 percent of 11 is not 8.5
but 9.35 so the large state with only 8
seats is in fact
short of its quota by well over one seat
my rule under represents 85 percent of
the population
because we intended to allocate 10 seats
the exact quotas
necessarily add up to 10 but the rounded
ones
add up to 11. and if there are going to
be 11 seats in the house the principle
of representative government and the
constitution
requires each state to receive its fair
share of those
not of the 10 we merely intended pause
down my reflection
and so that's where we begin that's
where the problems come
rounding it seems simple it seems
logical it seems fair
and it's not it can't be logical and
fair all at once
and this is what we're going to have um
example after example here in the book
about
so going back to the book again many why
don't they just ideas spring to mind why
don't they just create three additional
seats and give them to the large state
thus bringing the allocation within
quota why don't they just transfer a
seat from one of the small states to a
large state
perhaps it should be from the state with
the smallest population so it's the
disadvantage as few people
as possible that would not only bring
all the allocations within the quota but
also restore the number of seats to the
originally intended 10.
such strategies are known as
reallocation schemes
they are indeed capable of staying
within the quota so what's wrong with
them
in the jargon of the subject the answer
is apportionment paradoxes or an
ordinary language
unfairness and irrationality for example
the last reallocation scheme that i
described
which was where we just take the seat
from the smaller state and we give it to
the larger state so that we have things
back within quota that last reallocation
scheme
that i described is unfair by being
biased against the inhabitants of the
least popular state
they bear the whole cost of correcting
the rounding errors on this occasion
their representation has been rounded
down to zero
yet in the sense of minimizing the
deviation from the quotas the
apportionment is almost perfectly fair
previously 85 of the population were
well outside quota
and now all we all are within it and 95
of the population are at the closest
whole numbers to their quotas
it is true that now five percent have no
representatives
so they will not be able to vote in
congressional elections at all
but that still leaves them within the
quota and indeed only slightly further
from their exact quota that they were
nevertheless because those five percent
have been completely
disenfranchised most advocates of
representative government
would regard this outcome as much less
representative
than what it was before okay now i'm
skipping a
a vast amount right now i've just
skimmed a little bit there but i'm i'm
i'm
just taking out a whole bunch here and
david goes through a bunch of other
problems of the sort
why don't they just and the upshot of
all this is that that
none of them are able to able to fairly
apportion the seats without some other
problems arising
and so david gets to the point where he
talks about all these other
apportionment rules
and over the years and he writes
congress has continually debated and
tinkered with the rules of apportionment
jefferson came up with a rule and it was
put in place but it was dropped in 1841
in favor of one proposed by another
senator
daniel webster which does use
reallocation
now that one also violates quota but
very rarely and it was like hamilton's
rule deemed to be impartial between
states a decade later webster's rule was
in turn
dropped in favor of hamilton's the
latter's supporters now believe that the
principle of representative government
was fully implemented
and perhaps hoped that this would be the
end of the apportionment problem but
they were disappointed
it was soon causing more controversy
than ever because
hamilton's rule despite its impartiality
and proportionality
began to make allocations that seemed
outrageously perverse
pausing my reflection so we after some
discussion
we've come to the understanding there
was this rule hamilton's rule
hamilton came up with this rule which
seemed to be impartial
and proportional however it started to
make allocations that seemed
outrageously perverse
so going back to the book for instance
it was susceptible to
what came to be called the population
paradox
a state whose population has increased
since the last census
can lose a seed to one whose population
has decreased
i'll say that again a state whose
population has increased
since the last census can lose a seat to
one whose population has decreased
so that seems absurd doesn't it so
that's the population products we're
going to come back to the population
paradoxes again and again so just keep
that in mind
this idea the population paradox is if
your state's population increases you
might very well lose a seat
to someone who some other state where
their population is decreased which is
weird
and then david goes through solution
solutions
suggested to the population paradox and
although
why didn't they just um attempt to solve
that
and and and david talks about the
various rules so there was
a rule the rule that tried to avoid
these population paradoxes and things
hamilton's rule was one webster's rule
was another
and david writes after hamilton's rule
was adopted in 1851
webster's still enjoyed substantial
support so congress tried on at least
two occasions
a trick that seemed to provide a
judicious compromise
adjust the number of seats in the house
until the two rules agree
surely that would please everyone yet
the upshot of that was
in 1871 some states considered the
result to be so unfair
and the ensuing compromised legislation
was so chaotic
that it was unclear what allocation rule
if any had been decided upon
the apportionment that was implemented
which included last minute which
included the last minute creation of
several additional seats for no apparent
reason
satisfied neither hamilton's rule nor
webster's
many considered it unconstitutional for
the next few decades after 1871 every
census saw
either the adoption of a new
apportionment rule or a change in the
number of seats
designed to compromise between different
rules in 1921 no apportionment was made
at all
they kept the old one a course of action
that may well have been unconstitutional
again
because congress could not agree on a
rule
the apportionment issue has been
referred several times
to eminent mathematicians including
twice to the national academy of
sciences
and on each occasion these authorities
have made different recommendations
yet none of them ever accused their
predecessors of making errors in
mathematics
this ought to have warned everyone that
this problem is not really about
mathematics
and on each occasion when the experts
recommendations were implemented
paradoxes and disputes
kept on happening in 1901 the census
bureau
published a table showing what the
apportionments would be
for every number of seats between 350
and 400
using hamilton's rule by quirk of
arithmetic
of a kind that is common in
apportionment colorado
would get three seats for each of these
numbers except
for 357 when it would get only two
the chairman of the house committee on
apportionment who was from illinois
i do not know whether he had anything
against colorado proposed that number of
seats be changed
357 and that hamilton's rule be used
this proposal was regarded with
suspicion and congress eventually
rejected it
adopting a 386-member apportionment and
webster's rule
which also gave colorado its rightful
three seats
but was that apportionment really any
more rightful than hamilton's rule with
357 seats
by what criterion majority voting among
apportionment rules what exactly would
be wrong with working out
what a large number of rival
apportionment rules would do
and then allocating to each state the
number of representatives that the
majority of the schemes would allocate
the main thing is that that itself is an
apportionment rule
similarly combining hamilton's and
webster schemes they tried to do in 1871
just constituted adopting a third scheme
and what does such a scheme have going
for it
each of its constituent scams was
presumably designed to have some
desirable properties
a combined scheme that was not designed
to have those properties
will not have them except by coincidence
so it will not necessarily inherit
the good features of its constituents it
will inherit some good ones and some bad
ones and have additional good
and bad features of its own but it was
not designed to be good
why should it be pause there my
reflection and here i'm going to
uh utterly and completely steal david's
thunder from
towards the end of the chapter because
it's one of the most profound
things that i read in the book and so
and it has really changed my thinking on
this particular matter and david will
come to it but i just want to flag it
now because he's
talked there about why not um
if you've got these two schemes that are
designed
to try and solve the problem of
apportionment
why not pick one that's sort of halfway
in between these two
as we'll come to see this is the idea of
compromise out there in the world
compromise is a thing that is lauded as
a virtue in politics
that if you have two sides of a debate
and over here on side a they come up
with a particular solution
their purported solution called that
solution x and over here on side b
they have a different solution
altogether a purported solution or
policy
and call that theory y now if they're at
loggerheads and they can't agree
it's supposedly a virtue to come to some
compromise
compromise has as david will say later
on
an unfairly high reputation in fact
compromises are not good
the reason why compromises are not good
is because a compromise is a third
option
and if you have two groups of people
debating among themselves
it could be two political parties it
could just be two people
and a wants to do this thing and b wants
to do that thing
the reason a wants to do this thing is
because they've got an explanation in
their mind they've got a theory in their
mind about why this particular thing
thing x is the best thing to do and this
group of people over here or this person
b here thinks that no
x is wrong y is the best thing to do
and i have a good explanation in my head
as to why why is the correct thing to do
now if in fact you believe in compromise
and you'll say well
you can't decide among you therefore
what you should do is you should do this
third thing
this thing zed why shouldn't we do that
at least we're doing something
the problem is that if you do said if a
and b
if they're groups of people that could
be the whole population that could just
be
two people in a partnership if they
decide to do this third thing z
and if this third thing z or z if you're
american
if they do that thing and then that
thing fails
which invariably it does certainly in
politics
so many political policies and theories
fail when zed fails when the third
option
fails no one learns anything
neither group a nor group b actually
ever
endorsed z they didn't think that z was
the best idea they didn't think
z was a particularly good idea at all
they thought that either
x or y was the best idea so when z
fails what happens both a
goes back to endorsing x again and b
goes back to endorsing y again they both
revert to their original positions
and so then what do you do you just do
another compromise why should the
compromise be better given
that both x and y think they've got a
good explanation about why their
particular theory
is the best theory wouldn't it be a
better more parsimonious idea to
actually try out x if we try out
x and x is shown to fail great
everyone has actually learned something
a can no longer be committed to
x as actually being the thing that will
work and solve the problem because
they've learnt that it fails
so then everyone can get behind the
alternative now everyone can
do their best to implement why
now y might very well fail as well but
at least we're learning things we're
making progress we're ruling out stuff
we're not ruling out random things that
no one thought was a good idea in the
first place
if you're going to do the compromise you
may as well just be flipping a coin
about what to do next because no one
really has a good idea now it might very
well be the case of course
that x or y could succeed
we might expect at least one of them to
succeed because a whole bunch of
creative people
have good explanations in their mind
anyway they have explanations
as to why either x or y should succeed
but neither of the groups
no one has a good explanation as to why
zed
should actually work and so when zed
fails that's why we say no one learns
anything
no one's explanation has been refuted
indeed there was no explanation why
zed should work at all in the first
place zed has perhaps some of the good
features of x and some of the good
features of y
but it will also have the bad features
of x and the bad features of y
and perhaps more of the bad features of
both than either on their own
and it will have some good features of
its own and some
terrible features of its own but we
shouldn't expect it to work
because no one has an explanation about
why it should work compared to x and y
where two groups of people or two
individuals
do have an explanation in their minds by
their lights
as to why this thing should work and
that's why it should be tried and that's
why compromise is bad
especially in politics and yet
compromises held up as this virtue
of the way in which politics should
proceed because people say at least the
government is therefore doing something
many of us of course think that when the
government does nothing that's great
and the processes that are in place in
governments are there for a particular
reason
to actually cause gridlock to actually
cause things to stop
so that we can't have these terrible
compromises so the institutions are
there to slow things down
but many people believe in this idea of
just ramming through any old thing so
that something at least is getting done
government should do something many of
us think
government shouldn't do much at all
government should be restrained
from doing um too much because it tends
to do damage when it does anything at
all
not always the case there are there are
legitimate reasons for government at
least some of us think that
um but we like to constrain the ability
of government to do stuff because
more often than not it's coming up with
compromises that no one believes in
or it's coming up with bad ideas and
it's causing damage rather than
finding solutions to our most pressing
problems
okay after that rant let me go back to
the book
david writes a devil's advocate might
now ask if majority voting among
apportionment rules is such a bad idea
why is majority voting among voters a
good idea
it would be disastrous to use it and say
science there are more astrologers than
astronomers
and believers in paranormal phenomenon
often point out that purported witnesses
of such phenomena
outnumber the witnesses of most
scientific experiments by a large factor
so they demand proportionate credence
yet science refuses to judge evidence in
that way
it sticks with the criterion of good
explanation so if it would be wrong for
science to adopt that democratic
principle
why is it right for politics pause there
my reflection yes so for my
uh listeners and viewers that might be
new to some of these ideas there is in
the public mind it would seem
an idea of scientific consensus
now to some extent this has
validity
now there is a sense in which scientific
that the consensus of the scientists
has some validity and it's when a lay
person
is trying to decide what is scientific
knowledge at any particular time
so given a particular area that is not
your area of expertise
a good rule of thumb is to presume that
whatever the scientific consensus is
among the experts in that area is the
best
theory or the best explanation at a
given time that doesn't mean that it's
true
it just means that that's the best
explanation we have and
we should take seriously the best
explanations that we have at any
particular time
but scientific consensus is not the way
we adjudicate between
theories not in science clearly
every single good scientific theory was
once a minority view
was once understood only by a single
mind or a small team of people
more than likely only a single mind at
any particular time
so once upon a time the theory of
general relativity
was only understood by albert einstein
and no one else so he had an exceedingly
minority view
but we don't take a vote among
scientists to decide what is true in
physics
we let the theories compete
one against the other and the
competition is in light of a crucial
experiment
that's in fact the way in which we
decide between theories of gravity let's
say
which is what happened back in 1919 with
eddington's experiment
which decided between albert einstein's
general theory of relativity
and newton's universal law of
gravitation
now that's a that's a trope example but
the same is true of
any other area of science where there
are competing
theories competing explanations as to
what accounts for
the phenomena in question but it is not
a vote among scientists that decides
things
it is experiment that decides it is
observation that decides between
theories it is the evidence that decides
between theories
but people who perhaps don't understand
at the science
let's say astrologers there's more
astrologers than astronomers there's
more people that
believe they have an understanding of
astrology then would say they have an
understanding of astronomy
or even an interesting one compared to
the other but we don't therefore
conclude on that basis that the majority
should hold sway that therefore
astrologers should be funded by
government
institutions let's say we do fund
astronomers
not because there's more of one the
other but because
there is there are objective objective
ways of
measuring or comparing the theories of
one subject against reality
that aren't available in the other
although there is i guess there
there are certain ways of measuring
astrology
against reality but they typically come
up bad for astrology
whatever the case if we can appreciate
the fact
that democratic voting is not the
rational means
by which we come to gain truth or gain
better explanations in the area of
science
why should democratic votes be the best
way
of deciding what is best what is the
truer moral choice to make
in the sphere of politics why is
democratic vote
good in one area and not in the other
let me just reread what david said here
so if it would be wrong for science to
adopt that democratic principle
why is it right for politics is it just
because
as churchill put it many forms of
government have been tried and will be
tried in this world of sin and woe
no one pretends that democracy is
perfect or all wise
indeed it has been said that democracy
is the worst form of government
except for all those others that have
been tried from time to time
that would indeed be a sufficient reason
but there are cogent positive reasons as
well
and they too are a bad explanation as i
shall explain
some politicians have been so perplexed
by the sheer perverseness of
apportionment paradoxes that they have
been reduced
to denouncing mathematics itself
representative roger q mills of texas
complained in 1882
i'm not going to try a texan accent here
that's for sure i thought that
mathematics was a divine science i
thought that mathematics was the only
science that spoke to inspiration and
was infallible in its utterances
but here is a new system of mathematics
that demonstrates the truth
to be false in 1901 representative john
e littlefield
whose own seat in maine was under threat
from the alabama paradox said
god helped the state of maine when
mathematics reached for her and
undertake to strike her down
as a matter of fact there is no such
thing as mathematical inspiration
mathematical knowledge coming from an
infallible source traditionally god
as i explain in chapter 8 our knowledge
of mathematics is not infallible
paul's there just my commentary here so
this is the uh mathematic
mathematician's misconception um to a
large extent
and david has written very eloquently
and spoken very eloquently about this
idea in various places and i just want
to emphasize it again it's been said
many times in this series
and but the point is mathematics is not
infallible
mathematics does not give you certain
truth mathematics does not even give you
necessary truth
let that sink in for a moment that
angers
certain mathematicians they think that
mathematics
is a privileged kind of knowledge
i know that i have encountered certainly
mathematics teachers
that will say that people who do
mathematics are very lucky
because mathematics is the one place
where you can be
sure that what you have found that the
answer that you have found
is in fact absolutely 100 correct
but this is wrong and the reason it's
wrong is because the mathematics has
been done by a mathematician who's human
and humans are always fallible the point
is
that the subject matter of mathematics
is necessary truth this is what david
says in the fabric of reality
so i'll say that again the subject
matter what mathematics is studying
is necessary truth but that's not the
reward you get for doing mathematics as
david
it's much the same as in physics the
subject
matter of physics is the laws of physics
but that does not mean that by doing
physics we
discover the final absolute laws of
physics
what we have is knowledge of the laws of
physics this is a crucial difference
it's not just a quirky little bit of
philosophy this is an important thing to
understand because it goes to the heart
of fallibility
that the knowledge of something is not
the thing in itself
here's my uh teacup the teacup is there
it's out there in the world
in reality i've got certain knowledge
about the teacup about how big it is
what color it is and so on and so forth
i can be wrong about any of that even
though the teacup is right here in front
of me and i can
provide a description of it which will
necessarily always be incomplete
and necessarily contain errors i can be
wrong about any part of it
so too with mathematics the mathematical
realm is not
here in physical reality for us to look
at but it is
there in abstract space and we can be
wrong about the theorems of mathematics
we can prove theorems of mathematics but
those proofs
the proof is just a certain kind of
process a computation
that the mathematician goes through the
computation
does not confer on the conclusions of
that computation
upon the result of that proof absolute
certainty
at any point in the proof an error might
have been
committed an error might have crept in
either
because the mathematician themselves
made an error there was an error in the
assumptions
the calculator that was used to do the
proof might have been uh malfunctioning
there's any number of reasons why the
conclusion
of the proof might not be absolutely
true and by the way
there are many mathematicians who do
concede there's pure mathematicians who
understand that
the axioms they begin with this is how
mathematics works it begins with axioms
it follows rules of inference and so on
it leads to a conclusion
the conclusion can be regarded as a
theorem the point is
that the axioms themselves
even though they might be so-called
self-evident
that itself does not
confer absolute truth upon the axioms
self-evident to you
could not might not be self-evident to
someone else
whatever the case you can't prove axioms
are true
that's why they're called axioms but the
conclusion in a valid proof
only contains as much truth as the
premises that you begin with
however much truth there is in the
assumptions is
via the method of proof conferred upon
the conclusion but if you don't know how
much
truth is actually in the assumptions
then you cannot possibly be certain
of the absolute truth of your conclusion
and so that's the that's part of the
mathematician's
misconception as david speaks about it
in various other places
a very interesting part of
this philosophy of the philosophy of
mathematics as well
and very poorly subscribed to i should
say as well
people do still have the hierarchy of
knowledge that is spoken about
in the fabric of reality where
mathematics is up here as
the highest form this rarefied sphere of
absolute certainty and just below that
is science where although you can't be
certain you can be nearly certain you
can be very very sure about
what's going on in science and then
below that is philosophy where it's all
just mere matters of opinion
that's the classical misconceived view
of knowledge
of course knowledge is an interconnected
web where you can be wrong about any
particular part of it
and where sometimes there are far better
explanations in philosophy than there
are in certain areas of science
and so on okay let's go back to the book
so i
just said that um our knowledge of
mathematics is not infallible
but if representative mills meant that
mathematicians are or somehow ought to
be
society's best judges of fairness then
he was simply mistaken
the national academy of sciences panel
that reported to congress in 1948
included the mathematician and physicist
john von neumann
and it decided that a rule invented by
the statistician joseph adna hill
which is the one in use today is the
most impartial between states
but the mathematicians michelle balinsky
and payton young
have since concluded that it favors
smaller states
this illustrates again that different
criteria of impartiality
favor different apportionment rules and
which of them is the right criterion
cannot be determined by mathematics
indeed if representative mills intended
his complaint ironically
if he really meant that mathematics
alone could not possibly be causing
injustice
and that mathematics alone could not
cure it then he was right
however there is a mathematical
discovery that has changed forever
the nature of the enforcement debate we
now know that the quest for an
apportionment rule
that is both proportional and free from
paradoxes
can never succeed berlinsky and young
proved this in 1975
bulinski and young's theorem every
apportionment rule
that stays within quota suffers from the
population
paradox this powerful no-go
theorem explains the long string of
historical failures to solve the
apportionment problem
never mind the various other conditions
that may seem essential for an
apportionment to be fair
no apportionment rule can meet even the
bare bones requirements of
proportionality
and the avoidance of the population
paradox berlinski and young also
approved no-go theorems involving
other classic paradoxes this work had
much broader context in the enforcement
problem
during the 20th century and especially
following the second world war a
consensus had emerged among most
political movements
that the future welfare of humankind
would depend on an
increase in society-wide preferably
worldwide
planning and decision-making the western
consensus differed
from its totalitarian counterparts in
that it expected the object of the
exercise
to be the satisfaction of individual
citizens preferences
so western advocates of society-wide
planning
were forced to address a fundamental
question that totalitarians do not
encounter
when a society as a whole faces a choice
and citizens differ in their preferences
among the options
which option is best for a society to
choose if people are unanimous there is
no problem
but no need for a planner either if they
are not which option can be rationally
defended as being the will of the people
the option that society wants and that
raises a second question
how should society organize its decision
making so that it does indeed choose the
options that it wants
these two questions have been present at
least implicitly
from the beginning of modern democracy
for instance the us declaration of
independence and the us constitution
both speak of the right of the people to
do certain things such as remove
governments
now they became the central questions of
a branch of mathematical game theory
known as social choice theory
thus game theory formerly an obscure and
somewhat whimsical branch of mathematics
was suddenly thrust into the center of
human affairs just as rocketry and
nuclear physics had been
many of the world's finest mathematical
minds including von neumann
rose to the challenge of developing the
theory to support the needs of the
countless
institutions of collective
decision-making that were being set up
they would create new mathematical tools
which
given what all the individuals in a
society want or need or prefer
would distill what a society wants to do
thus implementing the aspiration of the
will of the people
they would also determine what systems
of voting and legislating would give
society what it wants
some interesting mathematics was
discovered but little
if any of it ever met those aspirations
on the contrary
time and again the assumptions behind
social choice theory
were proved to be incoherent or
inconsistent
by no-go theorems like that of balinsky
and young thus it turned out
that the apportionment problem which had
absorbed so much
legislative time effort and passion was
the tip of an iceberg
the problem is much less parochial than
it looks
for instance rounding errors are
proportionally smaller with a larger
legislature
so why don't they just make the
legislature very big say 10 000 members
so that all the rounding areas would be
trivial
one reason is that such a legislature
would have to organize itself internally
to make any decisions the factions
within the legislature
would themselves have to choose leaders
policies strategies and so on
consequently all the problems of social
choice would arise within the little
society of a party's contingent in the
legislature so it is not really about
rounding errors
also it is not only about people's top
preferences once we are considering the
details of decision making in large
groups
how legislatures and parties and
factions within parties
organize themselves to contribute their
wishes to society's wishes
we have to take into account their
second and third choices because people
still have a right to contribute to
decision making
if they cannot persuade a majority to
agree to their first choice
yet electoral systems designed to take
such factors into account
invariably introduce more paradoxes and
no-go theorems
one of the first no-go theorems was
proved in 1951 by the economist
kenneth arrow and it contributed to his
winning the nobel
prize for economics in 1972. arrow's
theorem appears to deny the very
existence of social choice
and to strike at the principle of
representative government and
apportionment and democracy itself and a
lot more besides
pause there just my reflection just on
uh this thing about arrows theorem which
we're about to get to a description of
um there's uh an interesting person on
twitter ethan the mathmo he calls
himself he's got almost
no followers he's got 114 followers
he studies mathematics at cambridge
i don't know him personally at all all i
know is the
articles that he writes for medium.com
and they are remarkable explanations of
mathematical theorems and one of his
most recent ones
is titled proving arrows impossibility
theorem
and so if you want more details about
arrows theorem
uh go to medium.com type in
proving arrows and possibility theorem
and
ethan i believe is the fellow's name
has has done a very comprehensive job
of explaining the details of the proof
i love this kind of thing i i did
you know mathematics myself at
university into
including some um graduate level stuff
but i was never i never regarded myself
as particularly good at it
um so for example i really really wanted
to know
um girdles and completeness theorem i
really wanted to understand that i took
subjects
at the higher undergraduate level in
logic and computability and we went
through
the proof in great detail but the only
way i could ever get through
the proof was to buy a book a companion
to go along
with the proof as we did it um
which which explained some more of the
details in fact i have the book uh
there it is there
by ernst nagle and someone else so it's
a it's a book about girdle's proof so an
entire book written
that explains girdles proof i should say
it's not merely about
you know the history or anything like
that it's simply an
explanation of girdle's proof what the
mechanics of getting through
the damn proof r because it's a very
long proof on its own
anyway whatever the case um this fellow
on medium
writes these similar similarly uh uh
easy to follow expositions of these
otherwise complicated mathematical
proofs
okay let's go back to the book david
writes
this is what arrow did he first laid
down five elementary axioms that any
rule defining the will of the people the
preference of the
preferences of a group should satisfy
and these axioms seem at first sight
so reasonable as to be hardly worth
stating
one of them is that the rule should
define a group's preferences
only in terms of the preferences of that
group's members
okay seems simple keep going
another is that the rule must not simply
designate the rules of one particular
person to be the
preferences of the group regardless of
what the others want
this is called the no dictator axiom
a third is that if the members of the
group are unanimous about something
in the sense that they have all
identical preferences about it then the
rule must deem the group to have those
preferences as well
those three axioms are all expressions
in this situation of the
principle of representative government
great
so they seem as david has said
hardly even worth stating they're so
blindingly
obvious that if you have a group it
should be
the preference of the people in the
group if it's a if it's sort of a
democratic type exercise that we're
going through here in decision making
it's the preferences of the group that
dictate what the group is going to do
not another group over here that's
dictating it okay so
or it's also not the case that one
person from within the group can dictate
what the entire group can do that's the
no dictator rule
so let's keep going arrows fourth axiom
is this
suppose that under a given definition of
the preferences of the group
the rule deems the group to have a
particular preference say for
pizza over hamburger then it must still
deem that to be the group's preference
if some members who previously disagreed
with the group
i.e they preferred hamburger to change
their minds and now prefer pizza
this constraint is similar to ruling out
a population paradox
a group would be irrational if it
changed its mind in the opposite
direction to its members
again simple straightforward stuff
david continues the last axiom is that
if the group has some preference and
then some members change their minds
about
something else then the rule must
continue to assign the group that
original preference for instance
if some members have changed their minds
about the relative merits of
strawberries and raspberries
but none of their preferences about the
relative merits of pizza and hamburger
have changed then the group's preference
between pizza and hamburger
must not be deemed to have changed
either this constraint
can be again regarded as a matter of
rationality if no members of the group
change any of their opinions about a
particular comparison
nor can the group all right all
simple axioms very rational
straightforward ideas that it would seem
no
rational person would want to disagree
with so what's the point
as david writes arrow proved that the
axioms that i have just listed are
despite their reasonable appearance
logically inconsistent with each other
no way of conceiving the will of the
people can satisfy all five of them
this strikes at the assumptions behind
social choice theory
at an arguably even deeper level than
the theorems of balinsky and young
first arrows axioms are not about the
apparently parochial issue of
apportionment
but about any situation in which we want
to conceive of a group
as having preferences second all five of
these axioms are intuitively not just
desirable to make a system fair
but essential for it to be rational yet
they are inconsistent
pause there just my commentary how can
you be rational yet inconsistent well
this is a a matter of logic as well and
it
and it it is reminiscent of girdles and
completeness theorem by the way what is
girdles in complex theorem well firstly
let's consider a
completeness theorem in there's
different kinds of logic
um let's not go too much into the
details the simplest kind of
logic is sentential logic um
it's it's very simple logic okay baby
sort of logic
and you can prove that everything does
provable within that system of
object of logic is true and that every
theorem that you write down
every true statement that you can write
down true by according to the axioms
right of the
of the logic that everything that you
can write down that is true
also has a proof now this idea that
everything that that everything you can
prove is true is called
soundness soundness and everything
that's true
has a proof is called completeness and
this
is true for sentential logic for the
simplest of all logic
and i think the kurt gerdel i'd have to
look this up don't quote me on this
i think that um um maybe his phd thesis
or something
that he proved the completeness
of predicate logic which is slightly
more complicated than sentential logic
so uh predicate logic is just a little
bit more complicated it includes
um uh operators like
there exists a number x or for all x
and so on okay so won't get into the
details
the incompleteness theorem the
incompleteness theorem
was a profound discovery it was about
simple arithmetic now simple arithmetic
you know one plus two equals
three and so on simple arithmetic we
know what that is
um is a more complicated system than
basic logic the most basic forms of
logic the most basic forms of logic
don't refer to numbers at all
okay but simple arithmetic obviously
does it's more complicated it's richer
what kurt girdle proved was that
although everything that you can prove
within the system of simple arithmetic
and
the system of simple arithmetic that he
used was something that relied upon
pinos axioms this guy pino came up with
the axioms of simple arithmetic
anyway everything that you can prove
within that system
was true according to that system but
here's the kicker
he also proved but but he he showed
this is the real profound discovery that
you can write down
true statements or at least statements
valid statements
in the system of simple arithmetic that
have no proof
we cannot show that they are either true
or false
they're undecidable this is profoundly
strange and unusual it means that there
are things in mathematics
that are valid to write down but for
which we have no proof
we cannot show that they're true or
false mathematical understanding of
those
terms okay and so that's what this this
here is reminiscent of
okay so um we can have a
a sequence of perfectly perfectly
reasonable axioms just like the
perfectly
seemingly perfectly reasonable axioms of
simple arithmetic pinos axioms
which nonetheless can lead to
statements that cannot be proved true or
false we can't find a true or false
proof of them okay they're undecidable
even though the axioms are so simple
and so too here the the
axioms are not only desirable but
essential for it to be rational yet they
are inconsistent
and david continues it seems to follow
that a group of people jointly making
decisions is necessarily irrational in
one way or another
it may be a dictatorship or under some
sort of arbitrary rule
or if it meets all three representative
conditions then it must sometimes change
its mind in a direction opposite to that
in which criticism and persuasion have
been effective so it will make perverse
choices no matter how wise and
benevolent the people who interpret and
enforce its preferences may be
unless possibly one of them is a
dictator
so there is no such thing as the will of
the people there is no way to regard
society as a decision maker
with self-consistent preferences this is
hardly the conclusion
that social choice theory was supposed
to report back to the world
as with the enforcement problem there
were attempts to fix the implications of
arrow's theorem with
why don't they just ideas for instance
why not take into account how intense
people's preferences are for if slightly
over half the electorate barely prefers
x to y but the rest consider it a matter
of life and death
that why should be done then most
intuitive conceptions of representative
government would designate wires the
will of the people
but intensities of preferences and
especially the differences in
intensities among different people
or between the same person at different
times are notoriously difficult to
define let alone measure
like happiness we talked about that in
the last chapter of course
um so this idea that i feel really
intensely about this particular thing
and you don't feel so intense so
therefore my intensity of feeling should
carry more weight than what yours does
well how do you measure that it's just
self-reported again
that begs the question of the last
chapter okay continuing
and in any case including such things
makes no difference
there are still no go theorems okay i'm
skipping just a little here
and we get into a very interesting thing
on which david has produced a video in
fact um so if you go to david deutsch's
in fact i'll link i'll link to david
deutch's video
about this thing here
electoral systems the electoral system
in great britain
was proposed that people were suggesting
and agitating and still do agitate as
they do in australia and various other
places
for changing the voting system it's an
important problem
okay given what else is being said in
this chapter about how to rationally
make decisions
there can be better and worse ways of
making decisions
better and worse ways of having voting
systems okay and david writes on this
topic
one perennially controversial social
choice problem is that of devising an
electoral system
such a system is mathematically similar
to an apportionment scheme
but instead of allocating seats to
states on the basis of population
it allocates them to candidates or
parties on the basis of votes
however it is more paradoxical than
apportionment and has more serious
consequences
because in the case of elections the
element of persuasion is central to the
whole exercise
an election is supposed to determine
what the voters have become persuaded of
in contrast apportionment is not about
states trying to persuade people to
migrate from other states
consequently an electoral system can
contribute to
or can inhibit traditions of criticism
in the society concerned
okay so just my commentary so that's
extremely important
if we want progress to continue as fast
as possible
we need to ensure that the traditions of
criticism are not
thwarted but as david is saying here
there can be the voting system which may
inhibit
traditions of criticism and so it can
actively stifle
progress enabling society to solve
problems
as quickly as possible let's continue
he writes for example an electoral
system in which seats are allocated
wholly
or partly in proportion to the number of
votes received by each party
is called a proportional representation
system
we know from balinski and young that if
an electoral system is too proportional
it will be subject to the analog of the
population paradox and other paradoxes
and indeed the political scientist
peter curied clickguard in a study of
the most recent eight general elections
in denmark
under its proportional representation
system showed that every one of them
manifested paradoxes these included the
more preferred
less seats paradox in which a majority
of voters prefer
party x to party y but party y
receives more seats than party x but
that is really the least of the
irrational attributes of proportional
representation
a more important one which is shared by
even the mildest of proportional systems
is that they assign disproportionate
power
in the legislature to the third largest
party and often to even smaller parties
it works like this
it is rare in any system for a single
party to receive an overall majority of
votes
hence if votes are reflected
proportionally in the legislature
no legislation can be passed unless some
of the parties cooperate to pass it
and no government can be formed unless
some of them form a coalition
sometimes the two largest parties manage
to do this but the most common outcome
is that the leader of the third largest
party holds the balance of power
and decides which of the two largest
parties shall join it in government
and which should be sidelined and for
how long that means that it is
correspondingly harder for the
electorate to decide which party
and which policies will be removed from
power pause down my reflection this is a
very common problem in australia we do
have
um large minority parties
by which i mean third parties basically
in australia we have
two main parties the labor party and the
liberal party or in federal it is the
liberal coalition party
which is a neat way of getting around
the fact that the liberal party
has formed a coalition with the national
party and so it's the liberal national
coalition and so already we have a bit
of an issue there which results in
compromise and everything else that we
were talking about earlier
but the greens have over the years
been a sizable third party
and in some places in certain states the
greens have become large enough to
sometimes
align themselves with labor with the
labor party just the left side
and so then the two of them together can
form a coalition
which is larger than the liberal party
which
often is the largest party or even worse
than that the
the green party will not form a
coalition with anyone it will just sit
in the middle
and it will hold this balance of power
it's been a number of times over the
years where in the senate in australia
the the green party has held that
balance of power
which means it although it might only
have two
three senators out of the 76 that are
actually in
the parliament of australia they might
only have two or three that is enough to
either give labor a majority or the
liberal party majority
which means then that in fact the most
powerful party
in a sense is the green party because
they become the king makers
now david david goes through a historic
example here
about uh west germany where in fact the
green the greens seem to like being the
third party
uh changing uh changing sides in germany
um so i'll just skip that little bit and
i'll go back to the book where
david writes arrow's theorem applies not
only to collective decision making
but also to individuals as follows
consider a single rational person
faced with a choice between several
options if the decision requires
thought then each option must be
associated with an explanation
at least a tentative one for why it
might be best to choose an option is to
choose
explanation so how does one decide which
explanation to adopt
common sense says that one weighs them
or weighs the evidence that their
arguments present this is an ancient
metaphor
statues of justice have carried scales
since antiquity
more recently inductivism has cast
scientific thinking in the same mold
saying that scientific theories are
chosen justified and believed and
somehow even formed in the first place
according to the weight of evidence in
their favor
just my commentary there that's
bayesianism as well
bayesianism tries to mathematize this
idea of inductivism
as being about weighing the evidence in
order to decide
which theory is correct or even
as the bayesians will say to produce the
theory in the first place
but the critical rationalist
understanding is that theories
are creatively conjectured and the
function of evidence is to simply decide
between them
it's a black and white process it's not
a matter of weighing
the evidence will actually rule out all
the theories except for one
and the evidence then is explained by
that single remaining theory for example
again going back to edinton's experiment
in 1919
which decided between newton's theory of
gravity and einstein's theory of gravity
and it ruled out iron ruled out newton's
theory of gravity
and in fact all other theories of
gravity and the observations that were
made the evidence that was seen was
explained by general relativity that's
the way of understanding the philosophy
of science that is
poppa's way of explaining this that is
david deutsch's way of explaining this
this is the correct way of explaining
this
what bayes would say is that somehow or
other you weigh the evidence and
one way of just refuting base my own
personal way of refuting base is that
in 1919 almost every physicist will
agree that the experiment was a crucial
experiment
which ruled out newton in favor of
einstein
but if you are really a committed
bayesian shouldn't you regard that all
the experiments prior to 1919
the all sim almost all the many
hundreds or thousands of experiments
that had been done observations that had
been made
that were consistent with newton's
theory of gravity
shouldn't they count on the scales and
so you've got all of this weight of
evidence
from newton weighing down one side and
apparently you only have one experiment
here
with regard to einstein and so shouldn't
newton still be regarded as true on
bay's theorem
well of course the bayesians then have i
guess they would do this little dance
where they would say
oh no but einstein's theory now subsumes
all of that previous evidence that was
counted for
newton well that's kind of a critical
rationalist view
it's saying that indeed this experiment
is the one
that says that now all of that other
evidence is in fact explained
best by the general theory of relativity
and not
by newton's theory of gravity so the
bayesian i presume would collapse into
being a critical rationalist at that
point although i'm
being unfair to bayesians because i
don't have one here and
i'm not planning on interviewing one
either okay back to the book
when we're talking about weight of
evidence david writes consider
that supposed weighing process each
piece of evidence including each feeling
prejudice value axiom argument and so on
depending upon what weight it had in
that person's mind would contribute
that amount to that person's preferences
between various explanations
hence for the purposes of arrow's
theorem each piece of evidence can be
regarded
as an individual participating in the
decision-making process
where the person as a whole would be the
group now the process that adjudicates
between the different explanations would
have to satisfy certain constraints
if it were to be rational for instance
if having decided that one option was
the best
that the person received further
evidence
that gave additional weight to that
option then the person's overall
preference would still have to be for
that option
and so on arrows theorem says that those
requirements are inconsistent with each
other and so seems to imply that all
decision-making
or thinking must be irrational
unless perhaps one of the internal
agents is a dictator empowered to
override the combined opinions of all
the other agents
but this is an infinite regress how does
the dictator itself choose between rival
explanations
about which other agents it would be
best to override and here we get to
the real gold nugget at the center of
this chapter
and david writes there is something very
wrong with that entire conventional
model of decision making both within
single minds
and for groups as assumed in social
choice theory
it conceives of decision making as a
process of selecting
from existing options according to a
fixed formula such as an apportionment
rule or electoral system
but in fact that is only what happens at
the end of decision making
the phase that does not require creative
thought in terms of edison's metaphor
the model refers only to the
perspiration phase without realizing
that decision making is problem solving
and that without the inspiration phase
nothing is ever solved and there is
nothing to choose between
at the heart of decision making is the
creation of new options
and the abandonment or modification of
existing ones
to choose an option rationally is to
choose the associated explanation
therefore rational decision making
consists not of weighing evidence
but of explaining it in the course of
explaining the world
one judge's arguments as explanations
not justifications
and one does this creatively using
conjecture tempered by every kind of
criticism
it is in the nature of good explanations
being hard to vary that there
is only one of them having created it
one is no longer tempted by the
alternatives they have not been
outweighed but out argued refuted and
abandoned
during the course of a creative process
one is not struggling to distinguish
between countless different explanations
of nearly equal merit typically one is
struggling to even create
one good explanation and having
succeeded one is glad
to be rid of the rest
wow okay so that really does go
quite the distance to explaining what's
wrong with conventional ideas about
decision making
and what david deutch is presenting here
as putting
creativity at the center of how we go
about choosing things
moving on to the next part and this is
where david
talks about compromise which is the way
i began if you recall
so let's get into david's explanation of
this another misconception
to which the idea of decision making by
weighing sometimes leads
is that problems can be solved by
weighing in particular the disputes
between advocates of rival explanations
can be resolved by creating a weighted
average of their proposals
but the fact is that a good explanation
being hard to vary
at all without losing its explanatory
power is hard to mix with a rival
explanation
something halfway between them is
usually worse than either of them
separately
mixing two explanations to create a
better explanation requires an
additional act of creativity
that is why good explanations are
discrete separated from each other by
bad explanations
and why when choosing between
explanations we are faced with discrete
options paused in my reflection so
this is precisely again i keep on going
back to the same
trite example but it serves the purpose
here if we have two theories
einstein's theory of general relativity
and and and and
newton's theory of gravity um and
newton's theory of gravity is basically
summed up by the formula f equals g m
one m two over r squared and einstein's
theory of relativity
is far more complicated mathematically
but is about the curvature of space time
if we weren't able to decide between
these two for some reason or other
uh if we're at a point where just prior
to 1919 we didn't have the crucial
experiment just yet
but it seemed like iron science theory
was making some good predictions
consistent with what
newton's theory was the conventional
model of
coming up with a compromise given that
we couldn't decide between them perhaps
if you're a
smart physicist that understands both
but you can't actually
you're not in a position yet to decide
the idea that you can come up with a
compromise
something that's halfway between the two
is ridiculous
one that's halfway with whatever that
would mean to have the one that's
halfway between the two
i don't know but if we could we would
expect that it's a bad explanation
because here we have two good
explanations two good explanations
competing
for explaining gravity something that's
halfway between won't be a good
explanation
whatever halfway between those two means
back to the book david writes in complex
decisions the creative phase is often
followed by a mechanical perspiration
phase
in which one ties down details of the
explanation that are not yet hard to
vary
but can be made so by non-creative means
for an example an architect whose client
asks how tall a skyscraper can be built
given certain constraints
does not just calculate that number from
a formula the decision-making process
may end with such a calculation
but it begins creatively with ideas for
how the client's priorities
and constraints might best be met by new
design
and before that the clients had to
decide creatively what those priorities
and constraints
should be at the beginning of that
process they would not have been aware
of all the preferences that they would
end up presenting to the architects
okay so i'm just skipping a little more
here
and david compares that process to
voting namely that the the person is
choosing between when when voting
a rational person is choosing between
their explanations of politicians and
their policies
they're not weighing things in their
mind they're ruling out they're
criticizing
and abandoning once and for all
particular political parties or
particular candidates
that's how they choose between people
back to the book so it is not true that
decision making necessarily suffers from
those crude irrationalities
not because there is anything wrong with
arrows theorem or any
any of the other no-go theorems but
because social
choice theory is itself based on false
assumptions
about what thinking and deciding
consists of it is zeno's mistake
it is mistaking an abstract process that
it has named
decision making for the real life
process of the same
name so this is so important in just
pause there my commentary this is so
important in science and philosophy
that when someone has named something
then they say
social choice theory and this is
mathematics and this is the mathematics
that governs
how people make choices just because
they've named at that
doesn't mean that it actually is about
how society makes choices
they've just called it that one might
very well say the same for other
subjects
perhaps all of psychology just because
it's named psychology
what these people in academic psychology
are engaged in
sometimes or evolutionary psychology
might not actually be
psychology it might not actually deserve
the name
this can happen more often than
we might appreciate or we might want to
admit
admit as well uh people name morality
all sorts of things as well and it's not
actually morality
just because you call it that doesn't
mean that's what you're actually
studying that doesn't mean
that's what you're actually talking
about you just named it that thing
you have mistake perhaps an abstract
process that you're going through
that you have named in this case
decision making for the real life
process at the same name
okay skipping a little bit more and
david then talks about
uh what what what people's reaction to
these no-go theorems
has been that despite the fact that
mathematics
has been shown to reveal that it's
almost impossible to come up with
consistent and rational
means by which we can make decisions
what's to be in response to that david
writes virtually all commentators
have responded to these paradoxes and
no-go theorems in a mistaken
and rather revealing way they regret
them
this illustrates the confusion to which
i am referring they wish that these
theorems of pure mathematics were
false if only mathematics permitted it
they complain
we human beings could set up a just
society that makes its decisions
rationally but faced with the
impossibility of that there is nothing
left for us to do
but to decide which injustices and
irrationalities
we like best and to enshrine them in law
as webster wrote of the enforcement
problem
that which cannot be done perfectly must
be done in a matter
as near perfection as can be if
exactness cannot
from the nature of things be attained
then the nearest practicable approach to
exactness ought to be made
but what sort of perfection is a logical
contradiction a logical contradiction is
nonsense
the truth is simpler if your conception
of justice conflicts with the demands of
logical rationality
then it is unjust if your conception of
rationality
conflicts with a mathematical theorem or
in this case with many theorems
then your conception of rationality is
irrational
to stick stubbornly to logically
impossible values not only guarantees
failure in the narrower sense that one
can never meet them
it also forces one to reject optimism
every evil is due to a lack of knowledge
and so deprives one of the means
to make progress wishing for something
that is logically impossible is a sign
that there is something better to wish
for moreover if my conjecture in chapter
8 is true
an impossible wish is ultimately
uninteresting as well
ok i've almost finished the chapter but
i'm going to i'm going to stop there
actually
for today because this one's gone on for
long enough it's only been a two-part
episode all about choices but i hope
you've enjoyed this one i
found this one really fascinating i
remember when i first read the book
when i encountered this chapter i
thought it's a rather strange
choice for david to make on choices to
talk about to spend so long talking
about
one particular parochial issue but
it's clear in retrospect why that was
done to reveal that
these supposedly perfectly logical
rational systems
are not the only thing we need in
reality
to guide our behavior as human beings
and our societies
mathematics is indispensable in many
ways
but is not the cure all nothing is the
cure all
creativity will always be required and
again this puts people
at the center so much of actual reality
that we are guiding in a way the way in
which
the entire cosmos is evolving at the
moment only locally here
on planet earth unless we're guiding the
way in which the earth is kind of
terraforming itself
constructing new things and we're doing
that by making choices
thank you for listening i'll see you
very soon again for the next chapter
bye-bye once more as always thank you to
everyone
for the support on patreon if you're
interested in making a patreon
regular donation or a one-off donation
you can search for me on google or
there's a paypal account as well that's
useful for one-off donations
thanks again and see you next time bye
[Music]
you